Justice K. S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) v. Union of India - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Justice K. S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) v. Union of India Add languages Page contents not supported in other languages. Article Talk English Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions General What links here Upload file Printable version Page information Get shortened URL Download QR code In other projects Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Look for Justice K. S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) v. Union of India on one of Wikipedia's sister projects : Wiktionary (dictionary) Wikibooks (textbooks) Wikiquote (quotations) Wikisource (library) Wikiversity (learning resources) Commons (media) Wikivoyage (travel guide) Wikinews (news source) Wikidata (linked database) Wikispecies (species directory) Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Justice K. S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) v. Union of India in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings. You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article . Search for " Justice K. S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) v. Union of India " in existing articles. Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title . Other reasons this message may be displayed: If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function . Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title. If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log , and see Why was the page I created deleted? Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Justice_K._S._Puttaswamy_(Retd.)_v._Union_of_India " Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Justice K. S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) v. Union of India Add topic